JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: As
the Trump White House juggles
political battles on multiple
fronts, its GOP allies
in Congress confront
a packed agenda and a
limited summer calendar.
Then: separating fact from
fiction -- why some school
teachers are focusing on giving
younger generations the
tools to navigate today's
complex media landscape.
CLAIRE BEACH, Media Literacy
Advocate: When they're using
their phones, they may know
how to make something
work, but they don't have
the ethical piece, the
emotional intelligence
piece.
It's a wilderness out
there for some kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a
new Broadway hit with
a message -- how the
musical "Dear Evan Hansen"
is giving teens hope for getting
through high school's isolation
in a social media world.
BEN PLATT, Actor: The
chance to sort of connect
and realize that nobody's
experience of loneliness
is unique and that everybody
at some time or another feels
on the outside looking in
is a really powerful
thing right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia is denying
that it tried to hack U.S.
voting computer software and
equipment before last year's
presidential election.
The online magazine
The Intercept reported
the allegation, based
on a National Security
Agency document.
A Kremlin spokesman dismissed
it today, saying - - quote --
"This assertion has absolutely
nothing to do with reality."
In Washington, the U.S.
secretary of homeland
security, John Kelly,
was asked about it at
a Senate hearing.
SEN.
CLAIRE MCCASKILL (D),
Missouri: Are you deferring
the investigation of
this to the FBI, or is
the department actually actively
engaged in investigating
the penetration or attempts
to penetrate the voter files in
this country immediately before
the election by the Russian
government?
JOHN KELLY, U.S. Homeland
Security Secretary:
I share your concern.
I don't disagree with anything
you said relative to the
sanctity of our voting process.
Clearly, it's an interagency
-- it should be an
interagency investigation.
And that is taking place.
DHS will be part of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
ranking Democrat on
the Senate Intelligence
Committee, Virginia's
Mark Warner, told USA Today
that the Russian cyber-attacks
were even more extensive.
But he said he doesn't think
that actual votes were changed.
And Reality Winner, the Georgia
woman charged, apparently, with
leaking the NSA report, remained
in jail.
Her mother called her a patriot.
President Trump today waded into
the political conflict over the
Persian Gulf nation of Qatar,
where the U.S.
has 10,000 troops.
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain
and the UAE all broke ties
with the kingdom on Monday and
accused it of supporting
terror groups and Iran.
Jordan scaled back ties today.
Today, Mr. Trump appeared to
endorse the move in a tweet
that said: "Perhaps this will be
the beginning of the end to
the horror of terrorism."
This in contrast to yesterday,
when the White House said the
president wanted to work with
all the parties to
de-escalate the situation.
British police have identified
the third suspect in Saturday's
deadly knife and van attack
in London.
He was 22-year-old Youssef
Zaghba, an Italian national
of Moroccan descent.
All three attackers were
shot dead by police.
Also today, hundreds across the
country gathered for a minute
of silence to remember those
who died or were wounded.
Meanwhile, the mayor of
London, Sadiq Khan, brushed off
criticism from President Trump.
The president has written a
series of tweets ridiculing the
mayor since Saturday's attack.
But, today, Khan said he's
much more concerned about the
invitation extended last year to
Mr. Trump to come
to Great Britain.
SADIQ KHAN, Mayor of London:
I really couldn't be bothered
about what Donald Trump tweets.
I'm not -- I don't how
to tell you this, but
I really don't care.
What's the important issue is
that, you know, Prime Minister
Theresa May offered Donald
Trump a state visit moments
after he was elected president.
I said at the time,
I don't think a state
visit was appropriate,
and my views haven't
changed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
didn't respond directly to Khan.
Instead, a spokesman said
the president appreciates
the queen's invitation.
In France, a man swinging a
hammer attacked police outside
Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris
today.
He allegedly shouted
"This is for Syria" and
struck one officer before
being shot and wounded.
Dozens of police took over the
scene, and blocked at least
600 people from leaving the
cathedral.
They were slowly being
released later in the evening.
There's word that ride-sharing
giant Uber has fired 20 people
after an internal investigation
into sexual harassment
and other complaints.
Various news outlets report
that the moves were announced
today at a staff meeting in
San Francisco.
A law firm investigated more
than 200 allegations of sexual
harassment going back to 2012.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
47 points to close at 21136.
The Nasdaq fell 20, and
the S&P 500 dropped six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Republican leaders in Congress
struggle to their to-do
list before the August recess;
the fight begins in the ISIS
stronghold of Raqqa; teaching
students to tell the
difference between fact
and fiction; and much more.
Members of Congress returned
to Washington today for what
could be a make-or-break few
weeks for Republicans' packed
agenda, that as the Russia
investigations and the upcoming
testimony of former FBI Director
James Comey continue to add
complications for the party.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
MAN: The Senate
will come to order.
LISA DESJARDINS: From
the Senate floor...
MAN: Good morning.
This hearing will come to order.
LISA DESJARDINS: ... to
committee rooms, to Capitol Hill
hallways, congress is back from
recess, and facing big
issues with little time.
Senate Republicans are at
a pivotal point, trying to
write their health care bill.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: We had another of
our ongoing discussions about
the way forward on health care.
We're getting closer to having
a proposal that we will be
bringing up in the near future.
LISA DESJARDINS: They would
like a vote this month, but
Democrats point out Republican
senators don't yet have a plan
with enough votes on their own.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: I have a message for
our Republican colleagues.
It's very simple: Abandon
repeal, stop sabotaging
our health care system,
and you will find
Democrats waiting to
work with you to improve
the health care system.
LISA DESJARDINS: The White
House, meanwhile, stressed the
will on health care, but not
the way.
SEAN SPICER, White House
Press Secretary: By and large,
every elected Republican in
the House and the Senate
campaigned on this for
the last seven years.
LISA DESJARDINS: But with health
care still unfinished, that
means a backed-up GOP agenda,
with infrastructure, tax reform,
spending bills, not to mention
raising the debt ceiling,
all needing attention
soon in order to pass.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: What a great team
this is, what an unbelievable
team.
LISA DESJARDINS: All of that
brought the GOP's key leaders,
House and Senate, to the White
House to meet with
President Trump today.
DONALD TRUMP: So we're working
very hard on massive tax
cuts, and we're working very,
very hard on the health care.
And I think we're going
to have some very pleasant
surprises for a lot of people.
LISA DESJARDINS: But even this
meeting had a nod to fired
FBI Director James Comey's
big hearing this week.
DONALD TRUMP: I wish him luck.
Thank you, everybody.
LISA DESJARDINS: And the cloud
that continues to hang over
the president's own agenda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
Lisa joins me now.
She is joined by
our own John Yang.
Great to have both of you here.
So, John, I'm going
the start with you.
You just heard Lisa's
reporting about what
they're doing on the hill.
What is the White House
trying to do right now?
JOHN YANG: Well, right now,
they're pushing infrastructure
this week, yesterday, airways,
tomorrow, waterways, Thursday,
highways and streets,
Friday, permitting process.
Now, you might think that
means they have got an
infrastructure bill ready to go.
No.
This is concepts,
it's proposals, it's
broad policy ideas.
They really don't have
a timeline yet of when
they think they will
have an infrastructure
bill ready to
introduce in Congress.
They don't even know yet
whether it will be one bill or a
series of legislative packages.
They're still on
the drawing board.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sounds
like it's still early.
So, Lisa, talk specifically
about the time crunch.
What is Congress
dealing with here?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
Congress is looking at
essentially a 60-yard
field goal to try
and get everything
done that it has to.
It has to be perfect.
Look at the calendar, what
Congress and Republicans
hoped to do this year.
This is what they wanted to
happen, have health care passed
in February and March and then
tax reform.
We should be talking
about a bill right now.
That's what they wanted.
Let's look at what's
actually happened instead.
The calendar now instead
has health care now.
Obviously, that wasn't
passed until May.
And then Senate is
dealing with it now.
So what's happened
to tax reform?
Well, that's been kicked back
because we see the debt ceiling
and the spending bill coming
up this summer, further jamming
the calendar, meaning tax
reform might be pushed back to
the fall, Judy.
And, as John said, this is
one reason there's not a
timeline for infrastructure.
It simply doesn't fit, and
it's not clear that all
these things fit either.
We're never seen Congress
be able to get this much
done in that amount of time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, as Lisa
is suggesting, in addition to
infrastructure, there is more
that the White House
wants to get through.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
They want -- they have got two
things on their wish list, one
thing on their must-do list.
On the wish list, they want
to get a health care vote
before the August recess.
They of course had hoped
to have that done by now.
And then, as Lisa has pointed
out, they want the tax bill
introduced after Labor Day.
They were hoping to have
that passed by August.
The must-do list, they
have got to raise the
debt ceiling, big debate
inside the administration,
do you do that clean with
nothing attached to it, or do
you have spending cuts and other
spending reforms in order
to get conservatives, fiscal
conservatives to vote for it?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Lisa, again, back to the
Hill, when Republican
leaders hear all this,
how do they think they can get
it done, or do they really?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes,
reality is a tricky concept
right now on Capitol Hill.
But this is what I have gotten
from sources that I trust.
They believe there will
be a Senate vote on
health care before August.
Now, there's big questions over
whether the House and Senate
will come together on a health
care package after that.
That's very much in question.
Tax reform, people are openly
talking now that they're not
sure that they can actually
get that done.
I'm hearing voices in the
Republican Party saying...
JUDY WOODRUFF: This year or...
LISA DESJARDINS: This year,
and maybe not in the next
cycle, because there's so much
heavy lifting.
They're now even starting to
say maybe that becomes a tax
cut, instead of sweeping tax
reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meantime,
John, at the White House,
the president is saying some
things, his aides and
spokespeople are sometimes
- - in fact, often saying
something different.
JOHN YANG: Well, on the
legislative process,
he keeps talking as if
health care is ready
for a vote in the Senate.
He talks about it as if the
tax reform, the tax cut bill is
ready for a vote in the Senate,
and everything is
just two weeks.
In two weeks, we're going
to have a great plan.
But this is put off
well into the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in fact,
Lisa, we were talking about
this earlier, what the president
is saying, John is reporting
in some of these expectations
that he's putting out there and
tweeting about, including
about other subjects, that then
members of Congress, leadership
have to react to, all of that is
having an effect on the agenda.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
I think, until now, many
Republicans have been able to
shrug it off, as much as they
themselves were
frustrated by it.
But today, Judy, Senator Bob
Corker, generally a Trump ally,
was literally speechless when
he was told about the
president's tweet about Qatar.
Now, I also have to say,
though, even though I
think these distractions
are actually affecting
the agenda now, something
bigger than that still is
that Republicans can't agree.
That's still the basic problem.
Republicans in the House and
Senate and in the White House
have not come up with plans
on these items.
And that's still the
essential problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's a
lot of moving parts, and I
know the two of you are going
to continue to report it.
And, as we speak, there's more
news coming out of the White
House and the Hill tonight
on all this.
Thank you very much, Lisa
Desjardins, John Yang.
For three years, the Islamic
State group has held the Syrian
city of Raqqa, which it made
the capital of its
so-called caliphate.
Now U.S.-backed Syrian groups
with the help of American and
coalition troops and airpower
have begun the battle
to retake the city.
Jeffrey Brown reports.
JEFFREY BROWN: They are called
the Syrian Democratic Forces,
and they have fought their
way to the outskirts of Raqqa.
Now the fighters of the
SDF say they're ready
for the main assault.
TALAL SILO, Syrian
Democratic Forces Spokesman
(through translator):
Morale is high and military
readiness to implement the
military plan is complete and in
coordination with the U.S.-led
coalition to fight terrorism.
JEFFREY BROWN: Backed by
U.S. coalition airstrikes,
the Kurdish militias
of the SDF and their
Arab allies reached
the city's northern and
eastern gates last week.
But the U.S. military says
the battle for the city itself
will be "long and difficult."
In neighboring Iraq, by
comparison, the fight
to retake Mosul from is
has raged since October.
And the fight for Raqqa may
be complicated further by the
crisis between the Persian
Gulf state of Qatar
and other Arab nations.
On Twitter today, President
Trump sided with Saudi
Arabia and others today
in the confrontation.
The U.S. has about 10,000
troops in Qatar, and a major
air base used to launch strikes
against ISIS.
The Pentagon says its posture
in there won't change.
State Department
spokesman Heather Nauert:
®MD-BHEATHER NAUERT, State
Department Spokeswoman: We
continue to cooperate with
Qatar and other countries
in the region in the
fight against terrorism.
JEFFREY BROWN: Meanwhile, Turkey
is keeping a nervous eye on
the fighting at Raqqa, less
than 60 miles from its border.
The United States is now
supplying heavy weapons to
the Syrian Kurds of the SDF.
They are allied with
Turkish Kurdish militants,
whom Ankara and the U.S.
consider terrorists.
BINALI YILDIRIM, Turkish Prime
Minister (through translator):
Despite our many warnings, our
ally, our friend the United
States has unfortunately
entered into a cooperation
with a terrorist
organization.
We will immediately retaliate
if there's a threat to our
nation, our country and to the
safety and lives
of our citizens.
JEFFREY BROWN: The U.S.-led
coalition also announced today
that it had bombed what it
said were pro-Syrian regime
forces in Southern Syria.
The pro-government elements had
reportedly entered a restricted
zone near what is known
to be a U.S. and British
special forces base.
And we look at the fight that
lies ahead in Raqqa with Joby
Warrick, national security
reporter for The Washington
Post, author of a
Pulitzer Prize-winning
history of the Islamic
State entitled "Black
Flags: The Rise of ISIS."
And Andrew Exum, a former Army
Ranger who served as deputy
assistant secretary of defense
for Middle East policy
from 2015-2016, he's now
a contributing editor
at "The Atlantic."
Welcome to both of you.
Andrew Exum, let
me start with you.
How significant is
the Raqqa offensive?
What are the stakes here?
ANDREW EXUM, Former U.S. Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense:
Well, I think it's significant,
although we shouldn't overstate
the degree to which this
will really herald the end of
the Islamic State.
If you rewind the clock two
years ago to when the Islamic
State was still spreading across
Syria and Iraq and threatening
our allies in Turkey and
Jordan, we came up with a plan
to try to squeeze the
Islamic State from multiple
different directions.
And part of what we have
been trying to do is apply
simultaneous pressure.
The idea was to eventually get
to kind of the dual capitals
of the Islamic State in
Raqqa and Mosul.
Obviously, the fight for
Mosul began last year.
We weren't able to get to Raqqa
by the time that President
Obama left office, in part
because we were still waiting
on some pretty big policy
decisions, including arming the
Syrian Kurds, who have borne
the brunt of the fight in Syria.
But we now appear to be
knocking on the doors of Raqqa.
The fight should be --
should last several months.
It's going to be
extremely difficult.
But once this is over, it really
-- it heralds perhaps the end
of the Islamic State as an
actual quasi-state, but we
should expect it to exist for
quite some time as a terrorist
organization, as insurgents.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Joby, fill
in a little bit more about
the practical difficulties,
especially vis-a-vis
what's happening in Mosul,
where it's dragging on.
JOBY WARRICK, The
Washington Post: Right.
Jeff, remember, this is the
capital, this is the true
capital of the Islamic State.
They're going to
fight to the last man.
This is really the sort of
endgame for them in terms of
keeping this caliphate alive.
And we have seen what
they have done to Mosul,
their other capital.
They held on for eight
months, and the place
still hasn't fallen.
So, we can expect all kinds of
complications in the battlefield
itself, everything from
the tunnels and the
sniping and sophisticated
defensive techniques.
They're not going to
let this go easily.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the
U.S. role here is airborne.
JOBY WARRICK: Mostly airborne.
And it's a critical role.
We do have allies that we're
relying on to do the fighting
on the ground, although we
do have advisers and people
on the forward positions doing
artillery work and that sort
of thing.
But it really is a fight
for our allies and not
for us on the ground.
JEFFREY BROWN: Andrew, if you
allow yourself to think ahead,
assuming a defeat of ISIS,
what would be next?
Where are they being pushed to?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, first off,
I think the defeat of ISIS
looks different in Iraq than
it does in Syria.
In Iraq, we have worked by,
with and through an Iraqi state.
That state is flawed.
It's weak.
It's grown in some ways more
federalized as the war has
gone on and as the Kurds have
really been able to flex
their muscles in the north.
But, nonetheless, it is a state.
In Syria, by contrast, the
conflict, which may not involve
the Islamic State past next
year, the conflict should
be expected to last
for quite some time.
The Turks are obviously
going to be very concerned
about who controls Northern
Syria, who controls
Raqqa.
Is it going to be the Kurds
with their Arab allies?
That might be unpalatable,
to say the least, to
President Erdogan in Ankara.
So, I think we should expect
Syria to remain, unfortunately,
quite a bit of a mess for the
foreseeable future.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, this, Joby
Warrick, gets very confusing,
I think, for people watching,
for all of us watching
at different times, all
the different players.
Right?
You think about the race to
defeat ISIS and the potential
aftermath and the chaos that
could be there as well.
JOBY WARRICK: Right.
Yes.
And you think about just
the oddity of this, that
we are arming a nonstate
actor, essentially
a Kurdish militia, against
-- who is arrayed one of
our NATO allies, Turkey.
And these two see each other as
mortal enemies, and yet we're
all on the same side in a sense
of trying to reclaim the
city from the Islamic State.
What happens afterward,
we just don't know.
Does Turkey allow a
Kurdish entity to control
this part of Syria?
I don't think so.
They're going to be
very insistent on
driving out these Kurds.
Does that mean another war
breaks out after ISIS is gone?
It's very complicated
and very dangerous.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about,
Andrew, the role of the Syrian
government itself at this point?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, this is where
it gets complicated, especially
down in the south, where you're
starting to see some
Syrian government forces
push up against some
rebels that we have been
supporting to try to
defeat the Islamic State.
After Raqqa, over the which the
Syrian government really hasn't
tried to make a claim, the next
big ISIS stronghold is Deir
el-Zour, where there is a small
toehold of the regime, where
the regime does want
to project forces.
And so U.S. forces and
U.S.-backed forces are
going to start bumping
up the Syrian regime's
coalition, which, of
course, includes Russia and
Hezbollah, as well as Iran.
So, the geography is just going
to get more complicated after
the Islamic State's capitals
fall in both Mosul and Raqqa.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Joby,
we referred in our setup to
this dust-up involving Qatar.
Does that have any
particular impact on
the fight against ISIS?
JOBY WARRICK: What's interesting
to me is to see the role
the Trump administration has
taken in that fight, with
the president himself
getting involved in
this new sort of Twitter
blast over the last 24 hours,
basically taking the Saudis'
side against the Qataris, who
are our ally as well, and
also the host to one of our
major military facilities.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Andrew,
explain the role that Qatar
plays and why it might have some
implications.
ANDREW EXUM: The U.S. military
is running the entire air
campaign for the fight against
the Islamic State out of Qatar.
We have several
thousand troops there.
And I think that's one of
the reasons why, after the
president's tweets, which really
echoed not only the Saudi, but
the Emirati frustrations with
Qatar, that's why you have
seen the State Department try
to clean that up a little bit.
But I'm sure that Secretary of
Defense Mattis and the secretary
of state were frustrated,
to say the least, to see the
president get so far out there
with his tweets this morning.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Joby Warrick, Andrew Exum,
thank you both very much.
ANDREW EXUM: Sure thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the dangers that arise when aid
workers start to pick sides;
the surprise Broadway
hit "Dear Evan Hansen";
and a student finds ways
to communicate despite
his stuttering.
But first: Helping children
distinguish between
false information and
fact-based news, it's
a distinction increasingly
a problem for adults.
And, to be clear, we're
referring to false information
disguised as a legitimate news
story, not reporting that
people dislike for political
reasons and label fake news.
In Washington state,
educators and media literacy
advocates have joined
together with legislators
to address the problem.
Special correspondent Kavitha
Cardoza with our partner
Education Week traveled there
recently.
It's part of our weekly
series Making the Grade.
NIAMH O'CONNELL, Teacher:
This was the front page of The
Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Niamh O'Connell
third grade history class at
Bertschi School is analyzing
old news stories, looking
for evidence of bias.
STUDENT: People, if they don't
know how to analyze it, will
just say, oh, wow, that's
true.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fred Coddon
(ph) looks at the choice of
words used in a story about
Japanese internment camps
during World War II.
STUDENT: Notice how they're
wording it Japanese, instead
of Japanese-Americans?
NIAMH O'CONNELL: What
was the purpose of that?
Why do they do that?
STUDENT: The purpose was to
say, oh, we're not imprisoning
American citizens, or, as
they put it, we're not
evacuating American citizens.
We're evacuating Japanese.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: And why do
they use the word evacuate?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Another student
also notices the language.
WILL PARSONS, Student: I saw
some fake advertising for the
Japanese internment camps.
They said they were
assembly centers.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: So they kind
of made it seem really cool,
and, actually, it wasn't?
WILL PARSONS: Yes.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: O'Connell
uses examples from the past, so
these kids can become smarter
about media messages in
the present, even though
they're only 8 years old.
STUDENT: I want to learn how
to like analyze it myself
and have my own opinion.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: They soak
up everything around them.
I think it's important for
kids to be able to control the
interpretations that they hear
and see every day, instead
of the interpretations
maybe controlling them.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Recognizing
bias in news stories is
one form of media literacy.
Spotting when the news
is entirely fabricated,
like these stories, is
something else entirely.
Often, these stories are
designed to look as if
they come from legitimate
news organizations,
and are meant to be
easily shared on social
media, resulting in
confusion over what's
real.
During the recent election
season, there have been reports
of a concerted effort to spread
fake news, in a bid to
influence public opinion.
A recent Stanford University
study of almost 8,000 students
showed they were easily duped
online.
Researchers found, overall,
young people's ability to
reason about the information on
the Internet can be summed
up in one word: bleak.
You have been working on
media literacy for how long?
CLAIRE BEACH, Media Literacy
Advocate: About 40 years.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Claire
Beach is a media literacy
advocate and former teacher.
She says just because kids are
comfortable with social media
doesn't mean they're savvy
about the information
they're consuming.
CLAIRE BEACH: When they're using
their phones, they may know
how to make something work,
but they don't have the
ethical piece, the emotional
intelligence piece.
It's a wilderness out
there for some kids.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She's worked
with lawmakers like Democratic
state Senator Marko Liias
to encourage media literacy
classes in grades K through 12.
MARKO LIIAS (D), Washington
State Senator: I was reading a
stunning statistic that, just
since 2003 to today, humanity
has created more information
than we created in all of
human history up until 2003.
So the pace of information, the
pace of data, the pace of what
our students are being exposed
to is rising exponentially.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: How do you
convince people that this is not
about politics, this is about
critical thinking?
MARKO LIIAS: Both of the
bills that I have passed
have had bipartisan support.
Whether you're a Democrat or
a Republican, right or left,
we want people to go into the
voting booth educated and
prepared to make the best
decision for our communities.
And if people can't
discern fake information
from real information,
that really corrodes
the basic institutions
of our democracy.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The
law in Washington state
encourages educators to
develop policies around
media literacy and
to share resources.
It also allows districts access
to federal technology funding.
This new law in Washington
is being used as a model by
about a dozen other states.
Advocates want to see
media literacy taught
in all 50 states.
JAMES STEYER, Founder and CEO,
Common Sense Media: There's
clearly growing momentum to
pass this kind of legislation.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jim Steyer
founded Common Sense, one of
several organizations dedicated
to media literacy.
NARRATOR: Here are five
ways to spot fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: They have also
worked with Harvard University
to create free lesson plans
and online resources.
JAMES STEYER: The essence
of media literacy is
critical thinking.
Every child in America needs
those skills, particularly when
they live in this 24/7 media
and technology world,
where they're just
bombarded with information.
Oftentimes, it's inaccurate.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: These students
are in Catherine Sparks' English
class at Edmonds-Woodway High
School.
STUDENT: It's crazy how
many people actually
trust these sources.
STUDENT: You can't distinguish
the difference anymore.
STUDENT: It can
get 1,000 retweets.
It is not even true.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks
uses the play "Hamlet"
to talk about fake news.
CATHERINE SPARKS, Teacher: It's
about spying and lying and how
that creates a ripe environment
for the proliferation
of fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks
has created untrue
stories based on the play.
CATHERINE SPARKS: In act one,
scene two, when he says oh,
but this too, too solid flesh
would melt, thaw and resolve
itself into a dew, sure, it
could be a metaphor, but Hamlet
has a shocking
flesh-eating illness.
(LAUGHTER)
CATHERINE SPARKS: Could you
actually support that with
evidence from the text?
Good luck.
Fake news is not news
you disagree with.
Fake news is fabricated news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks believes
letting her students create
their own fake news will teach
them how to critically
think through some of the
information they receive.
What words are used?
Who benefits?
Is there any truth to the story?
STUDENT: It's got to be
dramatic, like, absurd things
that you're like, what?
CATHERINE SPARKS: This is
a juicy story right here.
STUDENT: It's
entirely fabricated.
CATHERINE SPARKS: What
would be the outcome of
producing this story?
STUDENT: If the public
saw this, they're like,
oh, my gosh, there's so
much drama and scandal
going on.
CATHERINE SPARKS: What's
been the most painful
about the proliferation
of fake news in the
media is to watch my students
start to distrust everything.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: That's
exactly why state Senator Marko
Liias says media literacy is
so important.
MARKO LIIAS: At its
bedrock, when our founding
fathers created this
country, the reason why
they were so committed to public
education was to make sure that
we had an educated citizenry.
CATHERINE SPARKS: Anything that
starts with "share if you're
outraged," that's a bad sign.
And outrage is just the
lifeblood of fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Education Week,
I'm Kavitha Cardoza in Seattle,
Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aid
organizations, especially
those working in conflict
zones like Yemen,
say it's crucial that they
remain politically neutral.
They say it's the only way
they can safely do their jobs.
But a recent investigation by
The New York Times reveals how
one company may have endangered
that neutrality for many
humanitarian groups.
William Brangham has that story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: UNICEF and
the Red Cross are two of the
humanitarian groups working
in Yemen, where a brutal civil
war has killed or injured
at least 12,000 people.
The Times today revealed that
a logistics company known
as Transoceanic Development
wasn't only helping those aid
groups get their supplies into
Yemen, but the company was also
secretly helping U.S.
special forces do the same.
The Times reports how this
dual relationship could drive
suspicion that the aid groups
were somehow acting as agents
of the U.S. government.
I'm joined now by Eric Schmitt.
He's one of The Times'
reporters who broke this story.
And by Daryl Grisgraber.
She's a senior advocate
at Refugees International,
which is an aid group
that operates in the
Middle East, Africa,
and Southeast Asia.
She previously worked for
Amnesty International.
Welcome to you both.
Eric Schmitt, I would
like to start with you.
Let's just go over some
of these details again.
So this logistics company,
Transoceanic Development,
is working to deliver
and help deliver aid
supplies to Yemen for these
aid groups, while they're also
doing some work for U.S. special
forces.
Can you explain those two
relationships a little bit?
ERIC SCHMITT, The New
York Times: Right.
So, Transoceanic is this giant
global logistics company.
And its job is really to ferry
materials and shipments all over
the world for various customers.
And a couple of its customers,
as you mentioned, are the
Red Cross and for UNICEF.
And, in this case, they did
some warehousing, they did some
basic bringing materials and
shipments of supplies into Yemen
that would then be delivered to
-- through other humanitarian
organizations to the needy
in that strife-torn country.
So that's one of their jobs.
And they were very
open about this.
And when Mr. Darden was
kidnapped, his story became
quite public, because...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This
is the main, the central
character in your story,
who was sort of organizing
this organization in Yemen.
He was kidnapped by some
rebels there, and then was
released after several years.
ERIC SCHMITT: That's right.
Scott Darden was the country
director for Transoceanic.
So, he was responsible kind of
at the front end for getting
these shipments of aid into
Yemen.
So, that story is quite public.
What's new here is that it
turned out that Transoceanic
and Mr. Darden were also working
on secret contracts
involving shipping similar
types of materials into
Yemen for the military,
specifically for the very
specialized special operations
forces, the commandos, who are
operating in Yemen today.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And just
for the record, there's no
evidence that the aid groups had
any idea that the company they
were hiring to do work for
them was also doing this work
for the U.S. government.
ERIC SCHMITT: That's right.
Spokesmen for both UNICEF and
for the Red Cross said they
had no idea that Transoceanic
was carrying out these kind of
contracts with the military on
the logistics side of things.
And had they known, they may
have opted for another company.
But I must say, there aren't a
lot of companies that get into
these kind of very dangerous
war zone type of places.
So it's not unusual to find
a company like Transoceanic
dealing with multiple kinds of
customers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
So, Daryl Grisgraber,
what is your reaction?
You read this story.
What was your response?
DARYL GRISGRABER, Refugees
International: Initially,
we were all quite
dismayed as humanitarians,
because there's meant to be a
very strict separation between
military assistance, political
assistance, and
humanitarian assistance.
And there is quite a lively
debate that goes on right now
in the humanitarian world about
keeping those separate
and when and how is it
possible to combine them.
But the initial reaction
then is, because these got
combined, it's going to look bad
for humanitarians everywhere.
Humanitarians tend to
be a little bit under
suspicion anyway, just
because they're foreigners
often in a country,
where we talk about
the U.N. or big INGOs.
And they operate very
significantly on trust,
building trust with
the people they serve,
as well as the governments
that allow them to operate.
And to know now that the
humanitarian principle
of neutrality in
particular has potentially
been compromised or
even perceived to be
compromised is going to
affect all humanitarians.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the
concern, just to spell it out
even more clearly, is that if
a government or groups operating
in a certain country somehow
thought that you were receiving
shipments from a company that
was also working for a partisan
group in that nation as well,
that the humanitarian aid
workers might come under attack.
DARYL GRISGRABER:
Oh, for sure, yes.
Organizations could be banned
from operating in a country.
The humanitarian individuals
could come under attack.
And, in general, it's really
important to remember that
this just erodes the trust that
allows humanitarians to do
work everywhere and get access
to the people who really need
them the most, because
that often involves
really emphasizing the
fact that you are neutral
and not on the side of a
conflict, and so it's OK for
you to be serving people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Eric Schmitt,
in your piece you remind us
that there was a more notorious
incident where the CIA
was operating in Pakistan,
and it literally did
blur these very lines
that we're talking about.
Can you tell us what
happened in that story?
ERIC SCHMITT: Sure, absolutely.
In an effort to try and
determine whether Osama
bin Laden was actually
hiding in a walled
compound in Abbottabad, in this
town in Pakistan, they devised
a system where they would go
door-to-door in that city and
do inoculations, and hoping
that somebody would come to the
door, they would be able to
come inside, take inoculations
from presumably family members,
and then get some type
of DNA readout on this.
Well, this all came to
light, of course, after
the death of bin Laden, and
it very much jeopardized
not only the doctors that were
involved, but it basically
turned much of that community
in Pakistan against
polio vaccinations.
So, it became -- actually,
it was very counterproductive
for public health
reasons in that country.
And the CIA has said
it won't do that again.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Daryl
Grisgraber, what do you
-- what is your sense
of what revelations
like this could do for the
effort in Yemen right now?
DARYL GRISGRABER: Well, there
are very few aid groups,
relatively speaking, operating
in Yemen as it is because
of the security situation.
There are many U.N. agencies
and INGOs, international
non-governmental
organizations, that had to
withdraw their staff.
And so compared to the need
in Yemen, there are really
very few groups addressing it.
And if this breaks trust or
puts humanitarian under fire in
some way, it will be completely
comprehensible that
organizations pull their
staffs out of there.
But that means even less
help for -- what are we
talking at, at this point?
Potentially, 17 million
people might begin starving
to death in a few weeks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Daryl Grisgraber, Eric Schmitt,
thank you both very much.
DARYL GRISGRABER: Thank you.
ERIC SCHMITT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the 2007 Tony
Awards approach this Sunday,
we look at one of this season's
biggest Broadway hits and
the impact it's having.
Jeffrey Brown is back with
the story from New York.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Dear
Evan Hansen" is a high
school musical, but one
in which the loneliness
and pain of teen life is front
and center, and the sense
of isolation intensified in
today's social media world.
At the famed Sardi's Restaurant
recently, star Ben Platt
said audiences are clearly
finding a connection.
BEN PLATT, Actor: People that
come to the show feel, right
now, especially with sort
of hyperconnectivity online
and with people feeling sort
of instantaneously judged all
the time, I think people
kind of recede into
these sort of bubbles.
The chance to sort of connect
and realize that nobody's
experience of loneliness is
unique and that everybody at
some time or another feels
sort of on the outside looking
in, or feels that they can't
really fully be present, or
that they aren't sort of one
of the whole, but rather
on their own, is a really
powerful thing right now.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
23-year-old Platt grew up
around movies and theater.
His father, Marc, is a
major producer of hits,
including "Wicked."
Before this production, Ben
was known for roles in the
"Pitch Perfect" films and in
the musical "The
Book of Mormon."
He plays Evan Hansen as
a young man so insecure,
he can barely speak.
It's an acclaimed performance
of teenage awkwardness
and vibrant singing.
BEN PLATT: This role is
certainly the biggest challenge
I have had so far in my life.
And it's a huge blessing in that
way, too, because I feel like
I'm using all of the proverbial
tools that I have in my belt,
which is all you want as an
actor, is to feel like you're
really being able to show
everything you have got.
And, vocally and physically
and emotionally and all of
that, it requires a lot.
JEFFREY BROWN: When a classmate
commits suicide, Evan Hansen
is mistakenly seen as his one
friend.
Evan is suddenly a subject
of interest to his classmates
and the other boy's family.
He gains a girlfriend and even
a kind of instant celebrity when
a speech he gives about suicide
goes viral.
But it's all a misunderstanding,
destined to come crashing
down around him.
Steven Levenson wrote the story.
STEVEN LEVENSON, Author, "Dear
Evan Hansen": It's very much
this singular story of this
person in the world that we
know very well, but struggling
with these things that hopefully
are things that we all
know and experience.
But we never wanted it to feel
like learning or didactic.
We never wanted to teach
the audience a lesson or
to talk about technology.
We just wanted to tell
this story and hopefully
illuminate something
about the world in doing
this.
MICHAEL GREIF, Director: Yes,
and like in all the -- in all
great theater writing, those
themes get expressed
through that story.
And those things become
a part of Evan's story
and a part of his world.
JEFFREY BROWN: Director Michael
Greif previously staged two
Pulitzer Prize-winning musicals,
"Rent" and "Next to
Normal," that took on
complex contemporary
issues, such as drug
addiction and bipolar disorder.
You clearly feel that musicals
can tell difficult stories.
MICHAEL GREIF: Yes, certainly.
I grew up seeing a lot of
different kinds of musicals.
And the musicals I was always
particularly drawn to were --
"Man of La Mancha," I think
was the first
musical I ever saw.
Talk about a musical with
serious purpose and dark themes
that are expressed, you know,
musicals that really do say
something real and authentic
about "The Times" that they
were made in.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Dear Evan
Hansen" has certainly
struck a chord with
audiences, and many have
shared their gratitude
and their own stories via
e-mails and social media.
NARRATOR: "I brought our
15-year-old daughter and
13-year-old son to the show.
Their older sister, our
16-year-old daughter,
died by suicide a
little over a year ago.
We are still devastated.
But it helps us when people
talk about mental illness with
understanding and compassion,
as you did in your show."
NARRATOR: "The 'Dear
Evan Hansen' soundtrack
has saved my life."
NARRATOR: "Last night, I
found out my dear high school
friend had taken his own life
on Thursday afternoon.
I am devastated by this loss,
but grateful for having a
show like 'Dear Evan Hansen'
to turn to.
I just wanted to thank you
for getting me through this
incredibly difficult time.
#Youwillbefound."
JEFFREY BROWN: Ben Platt hears
such stories every night.
BEN PLATT: When I get to met
-- the opportunity to meet fans
after the show or hear from them
online or via letters, they
feel really comfortable
divulging really personal
things and opening
up about their own struggles.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh,
really, to you?
BEN PLATT: Certainly, with
anxiety and with self-harm and
with inability to connect and
all sorts of things.
And that's an incredibly
beautiful thing, and I want
nothing more than for the show
to encourage that and to be able
to receive things like that.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's no spoiler
alert to say that the show
does end on an upbeat note.
This is about finding
your way through pain.
STEVEN LEVENSON: Just as a
writer, just philosophically,
I want to leave the
audience feeling some
kind of hope and some kind of --
I'm not interested in grim, and
I'm not interested in torture,
watching things that just make
you feel awful, because we have
enough of that in the world.
And Evan, I think, ultimately
in the story, what was so
exciting was finding that the
story really wasn't about
a suicide, but more about a
character saving his own life.
JEFFREY BROWN: As for the actor
playing that character, as
Broadway's hottest young star,
his life will never be the same.
So, is all this pretty
heady stuff, all this?
BEN PLATT: It's
incredibly heady.
It's been my dream since I was
a really little kid to just be
in the Broadway community at
all, and to do musical
theater as a job.
And so now for that to be
true and to be doing it
in a show that's making
this big of a mark,
and in a role that comes
around not ever, is,
like, very hard to fathom.
But it's wonderful
beyond my wildest dreams.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ben Platt, Steven
Levenson, and Michael Greif
all received Tony nominations,
among the nine garnered by
"Dear Evan Hansen," including
one for best musical.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown on Broadway.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's
gratifying to know that
show is having an effect
around the country.
And we will be back shortly with
our continuing Student Reporting
Labs series Limitless about
people living with
disabilities, tonight focusing
on a high school student
who overcomes a speech
impairment.
But, first, take a
moment to hear from
your local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which helps keep
programs like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now
we continue our series
Limitless, stories filmed
and edited by middle
and high school students about
people in their communities
living with disabilities.
Tonight, we meet a teenager
who worked through his
speech impediment to become
a gifted communicator
and leader.
The video was produced
by the Student Reporting
Lab at Communications
Arts High School in
San Antonio, Texas.
The student correspondent
is graduating senior
Alexandria Gonzalez.
ALEXANDRIA GONZALEZ: Trevor
Acord seems to have it all.
Although some students
may have trouble being
seen in high school,
everyone knows who Trevor
is.
His peers selected him as
homecoming king and watched
him be crowned as Mr. Taps (ph)
in his school's
(INAUDIBLE) pageant.
He even has crowds of people,
family and friends, cheering
for him at his swim meets.
When Trevor was 3 years old, he
was officially diagnosed with
a speech impediment, also known
as stuttering.
MARISSA MONTANO, Speech Language
Pathologist: Stuttering is a
communication disorder that
is interrupted by disfluencies.
We may sometimes see
unusual facial movements
or body movements that
are associated with
stuttering.
According to the Stuttering
Foundation, there are
about three million
Americans who stutter,
which is about 1 percent
of the general population,
and it is more common
in males than females.
TREVOR ACORD, Communications
Arts High School: Some of the
downsides of having a stutter,
though, for me is that,
sometimes, it just makes it
really hard to speak and to just
really put yourself --
and hard to just really
sort of put yourself out
there, because you're
afraid of what
others will think.
But, with me, I love to
speak, and I just love
talking with all these people.
So, I guess it seems sort
of ironic that someone
with a stutter would be
going to a communications
school.
SHELLIE MALIK, Teacher:
I think part of Trevor's
success has come because
he is so comfortable
with everybody here.
He's very involved in
things, and so he's used
to everybody around him.
ALEXANDRIA GONZALEZ:
Trevor is a proud member
of the Peer Assistance
and Leadership Program,
otherwise known as PALS.
MAN: Watching him sprint down
the track next to a special
needs student really is where
I think he shines.
And that's when he amazes me and
all the PALS, for that matter.
ALEXANDRIA GONZALEZ: In addition
to being a leader and role
model to many at his school,
Trevor has also been a great
asset to the Communication
Arts recruiting team.
LEANNA YOUNG, Vice Principal,
Communications Arts High
School: Trevor is the very, very
best recruiter I have ever seen.
He wins every crowd over
within about 10 seconds.
And he's so sweet and
so engaging that every
middle school student
just loves him and wants
to listen to him,
wants to be his friend,
wants to talk to him.
TREVOR ACORD: I would
say that me going to Comm
Arts was probably one
of the best things, because
it just forced me to go and to
speak and to just really put
myself out there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh, Trevor.
What an inspiring
series this is.
And you can see more of
these stories from young
journalists across the country
at studentreportinglabs.org.
Also online: Go-go music was
born and bred in Washington,
D.C., but changes in
the city have put the funky
music genre in danger.
Can go-go keep up its
national following of fans?
You can read more
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, we talk
with vice president of the
United States, Mike Pence.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.